adding gradient layer costmap2d plugin tutorial (#1541)
ros-planning/navigation2: sphinx_doc/tutorials/docs/writing_new_costmap2d_plugin.rst

.. _writing_new_costmap2d_plugin:

Writing a new Costmap2D plugin
******************************

- `Overview`_
- `Requirements`_
- `Tutorial Steps`_

> 

Reviewer: A short (5-10s) gif here would be helpful. That way at the start of the tutorial, they see what they're going to learn about and the final result.

Requirements
============

- Ensure ROS2 and Gazebo are installed or built locally. For more details please refer for ROS2 installation web-page: https://index.ros.org/doc/ros2/Installation/.
- You must have Navigation2 project built locally. To proceed it please follow :ref:`master-build` instructions.
- Turtlebot3 packages should be installed from apt repositories or built locally:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ mkdir -p ~/turtlebot3_ws/src
  $ cd ~/turtlebot3_ws
  $ wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/ROBOTIS-GIT/turtlebot3/ros2/turtlebot3.repos
  $ vcs import src < turtlebot3.repos
  $ colcon build --symlink-install

Then add the following lines to ``~/.bashrc``

.. code-block:: bash

  source ${HOME}/turtlebot3_ws/install/setup.bash
  export ROS_DOMAIN_ID=30
  export TB3_MODEL=waffle
  export TURTLEBOT3_MODEL=${TB3_MODEL}
  export GAZEBO_MODEL_PATH=$GAZEBO_MODEL_PATH:${HOME}/turtlebot3_ws/src/turtlebot3/turtlebot3_simulations/turtlebot3_gazebo/models

and source it:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ source ~/.bashrc

Tutorial Steps
==============

1- Write a new Costmap2D plugin
-------------------------------

> For better demonstration an example plugin will put repeating costs gradients to costmap. Therefore plugin's name was chosen as ``GradientLayer``. It is simply based on ``InflationLayer`` without unnecessary for tutorial purposes functionality.

Reviewer: I don't think you need to bring up the inflation layer, lets just stick on topic of this toy example for creating a costmap plugin

The plugin consists from source code :download:`gradient_layer.cpp <sources/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_layer.cpp>` and its header file :download:`gradient_layer.hpp <sources/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_layer.hpp>`. Here is brief description of most important parts of code:

The plugin's main class is inherited from basic class ``Layer``:

.. code-block:: c

>   class GradientLayer : public Layer

Reviewer: Add the namespace here `nav2_costmap_2d::`

> It must have implementations at least for the following methods: ``updateBounds()``, ``updateCosts()`` and ``reset()``. However, in this example for better comprehensibility of Costmap2D plugin structure the following methods were overriden: ``onInitialize()``, ``updateBounds()``, ``updateCosts()``, ``onFootprintChanged()``, ``reset()``.

Reviewer: I would only mention the interfaces here and what each of them do. I think it would be appropriate to have a table with all of these methods, the purpose of them, and if they're strictly required. When bringing these up for the first time, we should make it explicit what the goal of each of them are.

First 4 methods have concrete functionalities:

1. ``GradientLayer::onInitialize()`` method is called at the end of plugin initialization. There is usually declaration(s) of ROS parameter(s) with its default value(s):

.. code-block:: c

  declareParameter("enabled", rclcpp::ParameterValue(true));
  node_->get_parameter(name_ + "." + "enabled", enabled_);

> In current implementation there is also setting ``need_recalculation_`` bounds recalculation indicator:

Reviewer: `In our example`

.. code-block:: c

   need_recalculation_ = false;

> 2. ``GradientLayer::updateCosts()`` method is called by the ``LayeredCostmap`` each time when costmap re-calculation is required. It updates the costmap layer only within its bounds. There are 4 input parameters of method: calculation window bounds and 1 output parameter: reference to ``GradientLayer`` costmap. Inside this method it is placed the gradient making algorithm for underlying costmap:

Reviewer: I think a few words here about "why" we have these bounds is important

.. code-block:: c

  int gradient_index;
  for (int j = min_j; j < max_j; j++) {
    // Reset gradient_index each time when reaching the end of re-calculated window
    // by OY axis.
    gradient_index = 0;
    for (int i = min_i; i < max_i; i++) {
      int index = master_grid.getIndex(i, j);
      // assign the cost associated with the distance from an obstacle to the cell
      unsigned char cost = (LETHAL_OBSTACLE - gradient_index*GRADIENT_FACTOR)%255;
      if (gradient_index <= GRADIENT_SIZE) {
        gradient_index++;
      } else {
        gradient_index = 0;
      }
      master_array[index] = cost;
    }
  }

where the ``GRADIENT_SIZE`` is the size of each gradient period in map cells, ``GRADIENT_FACTOR`` - decrement of costmap's value per each step:

.. image:: images/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_explanation.png

These parameters are defined in plugin's header file.

> 3. ``GradientLayer::updateBounds()`` is called by the ``LayeredCostmap`` to ask the plugin: which area of costmap layer it needs to update. There are 3 input parameters of method: robot position and orientation and 4 output parameters: pointers to window bounds. In current implementation ``updateBounds()`` re-calculates window bounds if ``need_recalculation_`` is ``true`` and updates them independently on ``need_recalculation_`` value.

Reviewer: This should be #2 since it is called before the updateCosts function, we should go in order

4. ``GradientLayer::onFootprintChanged()`` method is called whenever the footprint was changed. In current implementation it just resets ``need_recalculation_`` value.

Last ``reset()`` method is dummy:

5. ``GradientLayer::reset()`` is not used in this example plugin. It remaining there since pure virtual function ``reset()`` in parent ``Layer`` class required to be overriden. However in another plugins implementations it may have any code to be executed during costmap reset.

2- Enable the plugin in Costmap2D
---------------------------------

> 1. At first, plugin's class should be linked with parent in ``costmap_plugins.xml``:

Reviewer: You didn't talk about the costmap plugin registration in the cpp file

.. code-block:: diff

  @@ -12,6 +12,9 @@
       <class type="nav2_costmap_2d::VoxelLayer"     base_class_type="nav2_costmap_2d::Layer">
         <description>Similar to obstacle costmap, but uses 3D voxel grid to store data.</description>
       </class>

>   +    <class type="nav2_costmap_2d::GradientLayer"  base_class_type="nav2_costmap_2d::Layer">

Reviewer: Since this will be a standalone package, this should talk about what the costmap_plugins.xml file is and then adding this into it (and what each of the arguments mean)

  +      <description>Gradient layer for testing purposes.</description>
  +    </class>
     </library>
   </class_libraries>

2. On next step the source code of ``GradientLayer`` should be added to ``CMakeLists.txt`` in order to be included into final shared library:

.. code-block:: diff

>   @@ -83,6 +83,7 @@ add_library(layers SHARED

Reviewer: As a standalone package, I don't think you need to explain the libraries thing since that's typical, but you should explain the plugin related CMake items and how to install the `xml` file appropriately

  +      plugin_names: ["obstacle_layer", "voxel_layer", "gradient_layer"]
  +      plugin_types: ["nav2_costmap_2d::ObstacleLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::VoxelLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::GradientLayer"]
         robot_radius: 0.22
         inflation_layer:
           cost_scaling_factor: 3.0
  @@ -177,8 +177,8 @@ global_costmap:
         robot_base_frame: base_link
         global_frame: map
         use_sim_time: True
  -      plugin_names: ["static_layer", "obstacle_layer", "voxel_layer", "inflation_layer"]
  -      plugin_types: ["nav2_costmap_2d::StaticLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::ObstacleLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::VoxelLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::InflationLayer"]
  +      plugin_names: ["static_layer", "obstacle_layer", "voxel_layer", "gradient_layer"]
  +      plugin_types: ["nav2_costmap_2d::StaticLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::ObstacleLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::VoxelLayer", "nav2_costmap_2d::GradientLayer"]
         robot_radius: 0.22
         resolution: 0.05
         obstacle_layer:

3- Re-build Costmap2D
---------------------

Re-build ``nav2_costmap_2d`` package with all plugins onboard (including ``GradientLayer``):

.. code-block:: bash

  $ cd ~/navigation2_ws

>   $ colcon build --packages-select nav2_costmap_2d --symlink-install

Reviewer: If this is a separate package, you should not need to rebuild nav2_costmap_2d to use it

.. _writing_new_costmap2d_plugin:

Writing a new Costmap2D plugin
******************************

- `Overview`_
- `Requirements`_
- `Tutorial Steps`_

> .. image:: images/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_layer_preview.gif

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. image:: images/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_layer_preview.gif
    :width: 700px
    :align: center
    :alt: Animated gif with gradient demo
```

Overview
========

> This tutorial shows how to create your own simple `ROS plugin <http://wiki.ros.org/pluginlib>`_ for Costmap2D.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to create your own simple `plugin <http://wiki.ros.org/pluginlib>`_ for Costmap2D.
```

Before starting the tutorial, please check this `video <https://vimeo.com/106994708>`_ which contains information about Costmap2D layers design and plugins basic operational principals.

Requirements
============

It is assumed that ROS2, Gazebo and TurtleBot3 packages are installed or built locally. Please make sure that Navigation2 project is also built locally as it was made in :ref:`build-instructions`.

Tutorial Steps
==============

1- Write a new Costmap2D plugin
-------------------------------

> For better demonstration an example plugin will be used. It could be found in `navigation2_tutorials <https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2_tutorials>`_ repository as ``nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin`` ROS2-package. This example plugin puts repeating costs gradients to the costmap. Please refer to it when making your own layer plugin for Costmap2D. Below is a brief description of most important parts of plugin's code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a demonstration, this example will creates a costmap plugin that puts repeating costs gradients in the costmap.
The annotated code for this tutorial can be found in `navigation2_tutorials <https://github.com/ros-planning/navigation2_tutorials>`_ repository as the ``nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin`` ROS2-package.
Please refer to it when making your own layer plugin for Costmap2D.
```

> The plugin's main class ``nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin::GradientLayer`` is inherited from basic class ``nav2_costmap_2d::Layer``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The plugin class ``nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin::GradientLayer`` is inherited from basic class ``nav2_costmap_2d::Layer``:
```

.. code-block:: c

  namespace nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin
  {
  
  class GradientLayer : public nav2_costmap_2d::Layer

The basic class provides the set of virtual methods API for working with costmap layers in a plugin. These methods are calling in runtime by ``LayeredCostmap``. The list of methods, their description and necessity to have these methods in plugin's code is presented in the table below:

+----------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| **Virtual method**   | **Method description**                                                     | **Requires override?**  |
+----------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| onInitialize()       | Method is called at the end of plugin initialization. There is usually     | No                      |

> |                      | declarations of ROS parameters with its default values.                    |                         |

Reviewer: Remove "with its default values" since it should be also getting the parameters if needed. Add "This is where any required initialization should occur."

Author: Done.

+----------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| updateBounds()       | Method is called to ask the plugin: which area of costmap layer it needs   | Yes                     |
|                      | to update. There are 3 input parameters of method: robot position and      |                         |
|                      | orientation and 4 output parameters: pointers to window bounds.            |                         |
|                      | These bounds are used for performance reasons: to update the area          |                         |

> |                      | inside window where is new info available, avoiding updates of whole       |                         |

Reviewer: "inside the window"

Author: Done.

|                      | costmap on every iteration.                                                |                         |
|                      |                                                                            |                         |
|                      |                                                                            |                         |
+----------------------+----------------------------------------------------------------------------+-------------------------+
| updateCosts()        | Method is called each time when costmap re-calculation is required. It     | Yes                     |
|                      | updates the costmap layer only within its bounds window. There are 4 input |                         |

> |                      | parameters of method: calculation window bounds and 1 output parameter:    |                         |

Reviewer: "local costmap" means something else, so I wouldn't use that term. How about:

```
The ``Layer`` class provides the plugin with an internal costmap, ``costmap_``, for updates. The ``master_grid`` should be updated with values within the window bounds using one of the following update methods: ... 
```

Author: Done.

  for (int j = min_j; j < max_j; j++) {
    // Reset gradient_index each time when reaching the end of re-calculated window
    // by OY axis.
    gradient_index = 0;
    for (int i = min_i; i < max_i; i++) {
      int index = master_grid.getIndex(i, j);
      // setting the gradient cost
      unsigned char cost = (LETHAL_OBSTACLE - gradient_index*GRADIENT_FACTOR)%255;
      if (gradient_index <= GRADIENT_SIZE) {
        gradient_index++;
      } else {
        gradient_index = 0;
      }
      master_array[index] = cost;
    }
  }

where the ``GRADIENT_SIZE`` is the size of each gradient period in map cells, ``GRADIENT_FACTOR`` - decrement of costmap's value per each step:

.. image:: images/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_explanation.png

These parameters are defined in plugin's header file.

4. ``GradientLayer::onFootprintChanged()`` just resets ``need_recalculation_`` value.

5. ``GradientLayer::reset()`` method is dummy: it is not used in this example plugin. It remaining there since pure virtual function ``reset()`` in parent ``Layer`` class required to be overriden.

2- Export and make GradientLayer plugin
---------------------------------------

> The written plugin will be loaded in runtime as it's basic parent class and then will be called by plugin handling modules (for costmap2d by ``LayeredCostmap``). This is not a well-known dynamic library loading mechanism. Instead of it the pluginlib opens a given plugin in run-time and provides methods from exported classes to be callable. The mechanism of class exporting tells pluginlib which basic class should be used during these calls. This allows to extend an application by plugins without knowing application source code or recompiling it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The written plugin will be loaded in runtime as it's basic parent class and then will be called by plugin handling modules (for costmap2d by ``LayeredCostmap``). Pluginlib opens a given plugin in run-time and provides methods from exported classes to be callable. The mechanism of class exporting tells pluginlib which basic class should be used during these calls. This allows to extend an application by plugins without knowing application source code or recompiling it.
```

In our example the ``nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin::GradientLayer`` plugin's class should be dynamically loaded as a ``nav2_costmap_2d::Layer`` basic class. For this the plugin should be registered as follows:

> 1. Plugin's class should be registered with a basic type of loaded class. For this there is a special macro ``PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS`` should be added to any sorce-file composing the plugin library:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Plugin's class should be registered with a basic type of loaded class. For this there is a special macro ``PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS`` should be added to any source-file composing the plugin library:
```

  PLUGINLIB_EXPORT_CLASS(nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin::GradientLayer, nav2_costmap_2d::Layer)

This part is usually placed at the end of cpp-file where the plugin class was written (in our example ``gradient_layer.cpp``). 

2. Plugin's inormation should be stored to plugin description file. This is done by using separate XML (in our example ``gradient_plugins.xml``) in the plugin's package. This file contains information about:

 - ``path``: Path and name of library where plugin is placed.
 - ``name``: Plugin type referenced in ``plugin_types`` parameter (see next section for more details). It could be whatever you want.
 - ``type``: Plugin class with namespace taken from the source code.
 - ``basic_class_type``: Basic parent class from which plugin class was derived.
 - ``description``: Plugin description in a text form.

.. code-block:: xml

  <library path="nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin_core">
    <class name="nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin/GradientLayer" type="nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin::GradientLayer" base_class_type="nav2_costmap_2d::Layer">
      <description>This is an example plugin which puts repeating costs gradients to costmap</description>
    </class>
  </library>

> The export of plugin is performed by including ``pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file()`` cmake-function into ``CMakeLists.txt``. This function installs plugin description file into ``share`` directory and sets ament indexes for plugin description XML to be discoverable as a plugin of selected type:

Reviewer: Is that true that it also installs the xml? I did not know that.

Author: Yes, I've found it in `pluginlib/cmake/pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file.cmake`:
```
macro(pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file plugin_category relative_filename)
  ...
  install(FILES ${relative_filename} DESTINATION share/${PROJECT_NAME}/${relative_dir})
```

Reviewer: Awesome, I can remove other install calls for the XML then.

.. code-block:: text

  pluginlib_export_plugin_description_file(nav2_costmap_2d gradient_layer.xml)

> Plugin desription file is also should be added to ``package.xml``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Plugin description file is also should be added to ``package.xml``. ``costmap_2d`` is the package of the interface definition, for our case ``Layer``, and requires a path to the xml file:
```

.. code-block:: text

  plugin_names: ["obstacle_layer", "gradient_layer_1", "gradient_layer_2"]
  plugin_types: ["nav2_costmap_2d::ObstacleLayer", "nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin/GradientLayer", "nav2_gradient_costmap_plugin/GradientLayer"]

In this case each plugin object will be handled by its own parameters tree in a YAML-file, like:

.. code-block:: text

  gradient_layer_1:
    enabled: True
    ...
  gradient_layer_2:
    enabled: False
    ...

4- Run GradientLayer plugin
---------------------------

Run Turtlebot3 simulation with enabled navigation2. Detailed instructuction how to make it are written at :ref:`getting_started`. Below is shortcut command for that:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ ros2 launch nav2_bringup tb3_simulation_launch.py

Then goto RViz and click on the "2D Pose Estimate" button at the top and point the location on map as it was described in :ref:`getting_started`. Robot will be localized on map and the result should be as presented at picture below. There is could be seen the gradient costmap. There are also 2 noticeable things: dynamically updated by ``GradientLayer::updateCosts()`` costmap within its bounds and global path curved by gradient:

> .. image:: images/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_layer_run.png

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. image:: images/Writing_new_Costmap2D_plugin/gradient_layer_run.png
    :width: 700px
    :align: center
    :alt: Image of gradient costmap used
```
